A Health Check tool for Uyuni (#88)
uyuni-project/uyuni-rfc: accepted/00101-health-check-tool.md

* Alerting System: Leveraging Grafana's alerting mechanism, configured to monitor critical metrics and log patterns, triggering alerts based on predefined thresholds.

* LogCLI: A command-line interface tool provided by Grafana Loki, LogCLI enables direct querying of logs stored in Loki from the terminal. It supports running LogQL queries, live tailing of logs, and viewing logs in a flexible output format. This tool is particularly useful for administrators and developers who prefer to work within a CLI environment for quick log searches, debugging, and log analysis without the need for a graphical interface. 

### Saline

Saline is an addition for salt used in SUSE Manager/Uyuni aimed to provide better control and visibility for states deploymend in the large scale environments. It can provide metrics related to salt events and state apply process on the minions.

## Configuration and Deployement

* Monitoring Formula Integration: Loki/Promtail and uyuni_health_exporter configurations are managed via Uyuni's monitoring formula, ensuring seamless integration and ease of deployment.

> * Containerized Deployment: The Uyuni-Health-Check components, including Loki, Promtail, Grafana, and the Exporter, are deployed as containers within a POD, simplifying scaling and management.

Reviewer: Will there also be a "partial" deployment that connect to an existing Grafana instance but does not deploy its own Grafana?

Reviewer 2: I've added some more notes to clarify this

* Comunication with Uyuni server: The approach to establishing communication with the Uyuni server lies in the underlying infrastructure setup. When deployed in a standalone environment, the system leverages Podman's networking capabilities to facilitate connectivity. This involves configuring Podman containers to ensure they can communicate effectively with the Uyuni server, using Podman's built-in networking features such as container-specific network configurations. Alternatively, in environments where Kubernetes is employed, communication with the Uyuni server is managed through Kubernetes networking principles.

* Storage and Persistence: Utilizing persistent storage solutions for logs and metrics data, ensuring data integrity and availability for historical analysis.

> * Container Deployment Function: Design a generic container deployment function in Python that abstracts the container runtime interface. This function will initially support Podman but is designed to allow easy extension to other container orchestration platforms like Kubernetes.

Reviewer: What is the reasoning behind a "standalone" deployment tool instead of integration with `mgradm`?

Reviewer 2: I've added some notes to clarify this - essentially, we want the Uyuni Health Check tool to be able to run in a "disconnected" enviroment (i.a. when using a supportconfig), therefore an "standalone" deployment function would make sense to avoid having a dependency to this Uyuni server componenent.

Reviewer 2: This conversation continues in another discussion thread

### Component 1: Exporter 

Goal: Configure the  Exporter to gather metrics from the Uyuni server and managed systems. The exporter uses Salt runners to gather metrics.

Steps:
    Deploy the Exporter as a containerized application.
    Ensure the exporter is accessible for Prometheus to scrape metrics.

>     Ensure the exporter can run Salt commands targeting the server.

Reviewer: What do you mean with "Salt commands" specifically?

Reviewer 2: I've clarified this in the RFC text. Currently, some of the metrics from the "exporter" are gathered by calling Salt runner functions.

  

* Resource Usage: Running additional services for log aggregation, analysis, and enhanced alerting could increase the resource demands on the server, including CPU, memory, and storage. This might necessitate upgrades to existing hardware or reevaluation of resource allocation in cloud environments to ensure optimal performance.

* Learning Curve: System administrators and developers may need to familiarize themselves with Loki/Promtail's log querying language (LogQL) and Grafana's alerting mechanisms. The learning curve associated with these tools could slow down initial adoption and efficiency gains.

* Security Considerations: With the introduction of new components for logging and alerting, there might be additional security considerations to address, including access controls, data encryption, and secure communication channels between services.

* Alert Noise: Fine-tuning alert rules to balance sensitivity and specificity is critical. Without careful configuration, there's a risk of alert fatigue due to a high volume of non-critical alerts, potentially causing important alerts to be overlooked.

  

# Alternatives

[alternatives]: #alternatives

  

> - What other designs/options have been considered?

Reviewer: Have we considered extracting loki/promtail + custom exporter and configure them as new data sources for the existing monitoring stack, without setting up a new Grafana instance in a pod?

Reviewer 2: Yes, this has been clarified on the latest text.

Running the Uyuni Health-Check-Tool along with tye Uyuni Server container in the same pod. This could lead to a resource problem on the node running the pod.

- What is the impact of not doing this?

  

# Unresolved questions

[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- What are the unknowns?

Has Saline to be part of the current Uyuni Monitoring stack?

> How is the exporter going to access to uyuni-server container? For example, to query the database.

Reviewer: The current design assumes this will work. If it does not, a lot will need to be reconsidered.

Reviewer 2: Correct. I've described this situation a bit more in the RFC text.

- What can happen if Murphy's law holds true?

> The tool will just not be able to provide insights.

Reviewer: The tool might also exhaust resources (computing/memory/disk)

> Security issues.

Reviewer: I think we should look into this more and answer a few questions. 
- What data will be exposed in Grafana? 
- How can the user (admin) filter data so that it does not show up in Grafana?

Reviewer 2: Agree. I've added some clarified this better on the text.

As an engineer, I get the supportconfig mostly so I need this tool to consume the provided supportconfig and help me identify any potential issues before I dive into the huge amount of logs.

## Expected outcome

* Proactive Monitoring and Maintenance: Enable system administrators to proactively monitor the health and performance of the Uyuni infrastructure. By providing comprehensive insights into the system's status, the tool aims to help administrators detect and resolve potential issues before they escalate into significant problems.

* Streamlined Debugging Process for engineers: Assist engineers and developers in quickly identifying and addressing bugs or performance issues within the Uyuni codebase.

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

## Component Overview

### Health-Check-Tool

* Loki/Promtail: These two components are for log aggregation, indexing and querying. Loki acts as the centralized logging system, storing and managing logs, while Promtail is deployed on the Uyuni server to collect logs and forward them to Loki.

> * Grafana: Utilized for visualization, with dashboards displaying metrics, logs, and alerts, facilitating an integrated view of system health and performance.

Reviewer 3: This a question more for @admd 
Since it proposes to integrate with grafana, will it use our monitoring features also? Will the health check tool be also assigned to the monitoring SKU? If not, how do we plan to deliver Grafana and Prometheus?

Reviewer 4: It will be part of monitoring i-e people would need to have monitoring stack from us already to make use of health check tool.

* Uyuni-health-exporter: A custom exporter to gather specific metrics related to Uyuni server health, including database, service status, and resource usage.

* Alerting System: Leveraging Grafana's alerting mechanism, configured to monitor critical metrics and log patterns, triggering alerts based on predefined thresholds.

> * LogCLI: A command-line interface tool provided by Grafana Loki, LogCLI enables direct querying of logs stored in Loki from the terminal. It supports running LogQL queries, live tailing of logs, and viewing logs in a flexible output format. This tool is particularly useful for administrators and developers who prefer to work within a CLI environment for quick log searches, debugging, and log analysis without the need for a graphical interface.

Reviewer 3: Where should this tool be installed? Should it be placed on the client-tools channels?

Reviewer 2: In our PoC, we used `LogCLI` in its containerized form to query Loki from the CLI. Do we didn't really install on the system but do a oneshot execution of the container.

We could provide LogCLI via our container registry maybe.

Reviewer 3: If we want the customers to use it as a container we need to package it and deliver in our registry

URL: https://github.com/uyuni-project/poc-uyuni-health-check

### Saline

Saline is an addition for Salt used in SUSE Manager/Uyuni aimed to provide better control and visibility for states deploymend in the large scale environments. It can provide metrics related to Salt events and "state.apply" process on the minions.

URL: https://github.com/vzhestkov/saline

## Configuration and Deployment

There are different and complementary approaches when it comes to how to configure and deploy these tools:

* Monitoring Formula Integration: Loki/Promtail and `uyuni_health_exporter` configurations are managed via Uyuni's monitoring formula, ensuring seamless integration and ease of deployment. Making Saline and Health Check to part of the current Monitoring formulas.

* Additional Monitoring Formulas: Similar to the previous approach, integration with current Monitoring stack but using a separated formulas.

> * Containerized Deployment: The Health-Check-Tool components, including Loki, Promtail, Grafana, and the Exporter, are deployed as containers within a POD, simplifying scaling and management.

Reviewer 2: Alternatively, we could make containers to share the same network. That should also work.

> * Containerized Deployment: The Health-Check-Tool components, including Loki, Promtail, Grafana, and the Exporter, are deployed as containers within a POD, simplifying scaling and management.

Reviewer 3: we are already creating a podman network for uyuni, so this container(s) can start on that network

* Comunication with Uyuni server: The approach to establishing communication with the Uyuni server lies in the underlying infrastructure setup. When deployed in a standalone environment, the system leverages Podman's networking capabilities to facilitate connectivity. This involves configuring Podman containers to ensure they can communicate effectively with the Uyuni server, using Podman's built-in networking features such as container-specific network configurations. Alternatively, in environments where Kubernetes is employed, communication with the Uyuni server is managed through Kubernetes networking principles.

* Storage and Persistence: Utilizing persistent storage solutions for logs and metrics data, ensuring data integrity and availability for historical analysis.

> * Container Deployment Function: Design a generic container deployment function in Python that abstracts the container runtime interface. This function will initially support Podman but is designed to allow easy extension to other container orchestration platforms like Kubernetes. Having this "standalone" function (instead of integration with `mgradm`) allows the tool to more easily run on disconnected environments.

Reviewer 2: After reading your feedback, I  agree, we could have `mgradm` calling this standalone function, to keep `mgradm` as single entry point for the users.

> ### Component 1: Exporter

Reviewer 2: This "exporter" will provide Uyuni metrics, like total actions, salt jobs running and anything else we might find interesting to expose. Agree that we could also extend it to report over valuable data.

Goal: Configure the Exporter to gather metrics from the Uyuni server and managed systems. The exporter uses Salt runners to gather metrics.

Steps:
    Deploy the Exporter as a containerized application.
    Ensure the exporter is accessible for Prometheus to scrape metrics.
    Ensure the exporter can run Salt runner commands targeting the server.

### Component 2: Prometheus

Goal: Set up Prometheus to scrape metrics from the Uyuni-Health-Check exporter and evaluate alerting rules.

Steps:
    Scrape Configuration: Add the Exporter endpoint to the Prometheus configuration.
    Alerting Rules Definition: Create alerting rules to define conditions for triggering alerts based on metrics from the Exporter.
    Alertmanager Configuration: Set up Alertmanager to handle alerts generated by Prometheus, including notifications.

### Component 3: Grafana

Goal: Use Grafana to visualize metrics and alerts from Prometheus.

Steps:
    Add Prometheus as a data source in Grafana.
    Create dashboards to visualize metrics from the Exporter.
    Configure panels within dashboards to display alerts based on Prometheus data.

> ### Component 6: Loki and Promtail

Reviewer 2: Woops! Right.

Steps:
    Deployment: Install Loki on the Uyuni infrastructure as a container that is part of the Uyuni-Health-Check Pod.
    Configuration: Customize the Loki configuration to define storage locations for logs, retention policies, and other operational parameters.
    Service Discovery: Configure Loki to discover targets for log collection, focusing on integration with the Exporter and Uyuni components.

**Promtail setup**
Goal: Configure Promtail to collect logs from Uyuni server and managed systems, forwarding them to Loki for aggregation and analysis.

Steps:
    Deployment: Install Promtail on the Uyuni infrastructure as a container that is part of the Uyuni-Health-Check Pod.
    Configuration:
        Edit Promtail configuration to define the paths of log files to monitor. In the containerised Uyuni environment, the Promtail container must be configured to access mapped volumes that correspond to the log locations of the Uyuni server container.
        Configure Promtail to forward logs to your Loki instance.

### Component 7: LogCLI

> Goal: Incorporate LogCLI to provide a command-line interface for querying logs stored in Loki, enhancing the toolset available for diagnostics, troubleshooting, and operational reporting.

Reviewer 2: LogCLI will allow the user to query from all aggregated logs via CLI. This would allow to easy query the logs without going to a UI.

Agree that this is an extra component to maintain that it is maybe not bringing that many benefits if we already provide a Grafana dashboard to visualize the data.

> Goal: Incorporate LogCLI to provide a command-line interface for querying logs stored in Loki, enhancing the toolset available for diagnostics, troubleshooting, and operational reporting.

Reviewer 4: I'm not certain about its feasibility, but it would still be beneficial to have it available for engineers and support teams, even if we don't include it in the customer shipment.

### Component 8: Supportconfig metrics gatherer

Goal: Extract relevant metrics from support config files.

Configuration: No extra configuration needed apart from the path to the supportconfig files.

### Component 9: Saline

> Configuration: Deploy as a monitoring formula.

Reviewer 2: > Does it need any extra container? Data will be harvested from `Component 1: Exporter`

As mentioned later in the RFC text, Saline needs to attach to Salt Master Event publisher socket. Currently these sockets are IPC, so Saline would need to run together with the Salt Master in the same container.

Once we switch Salt Master to use TCP instead of IPC, then we could make Saline to run a in separated container.

The initial idea here is to deattach Saline from the Health Check Tool, and have Saline is an "independant" exporter from the Health Check one. Saline engine provides an API that can be used to consume metrics from Prometheus or any other source, like future Live Action UI view.

    * Alert Generation: Employ the Loki Ruler component to define alerting rules. These rules can be dynamically generated or updated based on the Uyuni Health-Check-Tool configuration, allowing for customizable alert conditions.

* Implementing alerts and recommendations involves:
    * Defining LogQL Queries: Writing LogQL queries that match the relevant conditions.
    * Configuring Alert Rules: Using the Loki Ruler to define alert rules based on LogQL queries. These rules specify the conditions under which alerts should be triggered and the severity levels.
    * Setting Up Notification Channels: Configuring the notification channels to receive alerts.
    * Recommendation Logic: For recommendations, the alerting mechanism can be extended with additional logic to suggest actions.

## Metrics

* Server status and resource utilization

* Database health and integrity

* Status of relevant Uyuni services

## Saline vs Health Check Tool

We want to differentiate conceptually between "Saline" and the "Health Check Tool". In this regard, these are two different components with different purposes.

> ### Saline: Salt state appliement monitoring to be integrated to the product.

Reviewer: nitpick: "Appliement" is not an English noun, you probably mean "application"

Saline exposes Salt state metrics to Prometheus. It is a tool meant to attach to Salt Master sockets and analyze and extract Salt state/jobs metrics from a live and running Uyuni server.

Saline setup is done is two steps:

> 1. Install `saline` RPM in the Uyuni server. This provides "setup" script and new "Formulas with Forms".

Reviewer 2: Correct. I'm adding a note to clarify this.

> 2. Run `saline-setup run` to configure and enable the `salined` service to attach to the Salt Master.

Reviewer 2: We are not considering yet to have Saline enabled by default. If the user wants to enable it, then yeah, they should run an `mgradm` command that takes care of configuring and enabling it.

Added some notes around this to the text.

> 3. In the "Formulas with Forms" UI, new formulas will appear: "Saline Prometheus" and "Saline Grafana". These can be used to automatically configure your Prometheus and Grafana instances to get the metrics and dashboards from Saline.

Reviewer 2: Yes, I also agree. This sentence refers to "existing" grafana/prometheus instances, as these formulas are just to configure the existing instances. I'm fixing the text

Saline already provides an easy way to integrate with the current Monitoring Stack (Formulas with Forms).

The `salined` service must be able to attach to the Salt Master. At the moment this is done by connecting to Salt Master IPC sockets, which means `salined` needs to live in the same system/container than the Salt Master. There already an ongoing research to make Salt Master to use TCP instead of IPC sockets, that would help us at the time we want to split the different components of Uyuni server into individual containers.

The Saline engine that is running on the Uyuni server, can be also used to feed a future UI with a live view of running actions. It is a potential component that we may want eventually integrate as part of the default Uyuni server stack.

### Health Check Tool: A tool you can run on a live server or use in a disconnected setup (via supportconfig)

> In this case, this tool is mean not only to provide a picture of the current health status of the Uyuni server, but also to help engineers to debug disconnected setups via "supportconfig". In this regard, the tool cannot always rely on existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, but it should be able to deploy its own instances to visualize the data on disconnected environments.

Reviewer: Can you add an explanation of the terms "disconnected setup" and "disconnected environment"? I don't know what exactly you mean with those terms.

- The Health Check Tool is not installed or running by default in a Uyuni server.
- As multiple components (containers) are deployed, resources on a live Uyuni server might be affected.

> - It should be able to reuse existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, allowing integration with existing Monitoring stack.

Reviewer: The heading says "via supportconfig". When using the tool against a supportconfig, why does it need to integrate with an existing stack? My understanding was that this is a different type of user (supporter) who uses this "on-demand".

Reviewer 2: I've arranged this part of the text. I hope it makes more sense now.

> - It should be able to reuse existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, allowing integration with existing Monitoring stack.

Reviewer 4: System administrators are part of the target audience here, Ricardo.

> # TBD: Tentative plan & schedule

Reviewer: Again, my understanding is the RFC describes a feature/story and how it's implemented. The timeline is orthogonal to that. IMO this section can be dropped.

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I was hesitating about bringing this to the RFC text. I can drop this.

Reviewer 2: I've just renamed it to implementation steps.

### Phase 0 (before 5.0 GA):

#### Uyuni Health Check
- Create RPM packages in OBS/IBS.
- Use container images building on OBS/IBS for the different components.
- Provide an "standalone" version only (no integration with Monitoring stack). Via Uyuni server channel (or others so it is available for engineering or supporters).
- Flag this as a Tech Preview.

#### Saline
- Research about using TCP instead of IPC sockets for Salt Master internal sockets.

> - Build Saline in OBS/IBS and provide it via RPM package for the Uyuni Server channel.

Reviewer 2: I've rearranged the text, as we actually want "Saline" to be part of the Uyuni server image.

- Integration with Monitoring Stack. Enhance monitoring formula to enable Health Check monitoring.
- Reuse configuration from "standalone" version.

#### Saline
- Provide "Saline" inside a separated container that attach to Salt Master TCP sockets from "uyuni-server" container.
- Alternatively, explore sharing Salt Master IPC sockets between containers.

# How is the exporter going to access to uyuni-server container? For example, to query the database.
As mentioned, the exporter needs to have access to Uyuni server container. It does need to query the DB and also execute some Salt runners jobs to gather metrics. If the "exporter" runs in a separated container than the Salt Master, then we can make the "exporter" container to run in the same network than the "uyuni-server", then TCP sockets are available to use.

There are some Salt runners jobs that requires access to Salt Master Event publisher, currently exposed via IPC socket. This makes it tricky access these sockets from a different container. Some metrics might not be available until we move to "TCP" sockets for the Salt Master Event publisher in this case.

> Alternatively, we could make the "exporter" as part of the server-image, even if not running by default. Then it is up to the Healh Check Tool or Monitoring formula to start it. This would solve the current issue of not having access to the IPC sockets.

Reviewer 5: We have two parts. Monitoring formula takes care of exporters on the minions and does not run on the server.
We also have monitoring state on the server which is triggered/enabled via the API. It will need to be reworked in the containerized server anyway.

# Security considerations
In the current design, we are exposing metrics via Promotheus and making them available in Grafana, and more importantly we are exposing logs messages via Loki/LogCLI to CLI and Grafana users. It is important to notice that after running this tool, and until related containers are destroyed, the Grafana Dashboards (and other components like Prometheus and Loki/LogCLI) are exposing metrics and logs messages that may contain sensitive data and information to any non-root user in the system or to anyone that have access to this host in the network.

> Promtail pipeline definition can be enhanced to use [replace](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/send-data/promtail/stages/replace/) function, to hidden sensitive data from logs.

Reviewer: Will this be configurable in the formula?

Reviewer 2: Yes. Adding a note to clarify this.

> Authentication for backend for Prometheus and Loki is usually delegated to an authentication reverse proxy.

Reviewer: 1. Will this be configurable in the formula?
2. Will it be documented?

# Drawbacks

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* Resource Usage: Running additional services for log aggregation, analysis, and enhanced alerting could increase the resource demands on the server, including CPU, memory, and storage. This might necessitate upgrades to existing hardware or reevaluation of resource allocation in cloud environments to ensure optimal performance.

> * Learning Curve: System administrators and developers may need to familiarize themselves with Loki/Promtail's log querying language (LogQL) and Grafana's alerting mechanisms. The learning curve associated with these tools could slow down initial adoption and efficiency gains.

Reviewer: Is the learning curve for Loki shallower than for other (more popular) solutions? If it's as steep as the competition, I don't see the learning curve as a drawback.

That said, what are the plans for the documentation to help users adopting the new monitoring capabilities?

Reviewer 2: > Is the learning curve for Loki shallower than for other (more popular) solutions? If it's as steep as the competition, I don't see the learning curve as a drawback.
> 
> That said, what are the plans for the documentation to help users adopting the new monitoring capabilities?

Yeah, I see your point - other popular solutions would have also similar learning curve, so in this sense, learning curve is also a drawback if we go with different solution.

Actually, as Grafana is already part of our Monitoring stack, that would probably help with the learning curve.

I'm moving the "learning curve" to a separated "Learning curve and Documentation" section outside of the "drawbacks".

## Use cases

**User Story 1**

As a system administrator using the Uyuni, I want a comprehensive health check tool that can efficiently assess the overall health and performance of the Uyuni infrastructure and its components. This tool should provide valuable insights into the system's status, detect potential issues, and offer recommendations for improvements, enabling me to proactively maintain and optimize the Uyuni environment.

**User story 2**

User Story: As an engineer responsible for maintaining the Uyuni codebase, I want to efficiently investigate and fix reported bugs or performance issues within the Uyuni infrastructure. To expedite the debugging process and ensure a stable codebase, I would like to leverage the capabilities of the integrated health check tool, which will help me identify any underlying health-related problems that could be contributing to the reported bug.

> As an engineer, I get the supportconfig mostly so I need this tool to consume the provided supportconfig and help me identify any potential issues before I dive into the huge amount of logs.

Reviewer 2: That is correct.

* Grafana: Utilized for visualization, with dashboards displaying metrics, logs, and alerts, facilitating an integrated view of system health and performance.

* Uyuni-health-exporter: A custom exporter to gather specific metrics related to Uyuni server health, including database, service status, and resource usage.

* Alerting System: Leveraging Grafana's alerting mechanism, configured to monitor critical metrics and log patterns, triggering alerts based on predefined thresholds.

* LogCLI: A command-line interface tool provided by Grafana Loki, LogCLI enables direct querying of logs stored in Loki from the terminal. It supports running LogQL queries, live tailing of logs, and viewing logs in a flexible output format. This tool is particularly useful for administrators and developers who prefer to work within a CLI environment for quick log searches, debugging, and log analysis without the need for a graphical interface.

URL: https://github.com/uyuni-project/poc-uyuni-health-check

### Saline

> Saline is an addition for Salt used in SUSE Manager/Uyuni aimed to provide better control and visibility for states deploymend in the large scale environments. It can provide metrics related to Salt events and "state.apply" process on the minions.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Saline is an addition for Salt used in SUSE Manager/Uyuni aimed to provide better control and visibility for states deployment in the large scale environments. It can provide metrics related to Salt events and "state.apply" process on the minions.
```

URL: https://github.com/vzhestkov/saline

> ## Configuration and Deployment

Reviewer 5: This section lists possible implementation options whereas we should name here which solutions we decide for. E.g. we could write:

- integrated solution: extending existing monitoring stack
- standalone aka disconnected solution: containerized deployment including only Loki, Promtail and Grafana.

Reviewer 2: I've updated the text, so it is more clear now which are the  proposed solutions.

There are different and complementary approaches when it comes to how to configure and deploy these tools:

* Monitoring Formula Integration: Loki/Promtail and `uyuni_health_exporter` configurations are managed via Uyuni's monitoring formula, ensuring seamless integration and ease of deployment. Making Saline and Health Check to part of the current Monitoring formulas.

* Additional Monitoring Formulas: Similar to the previous approach, integration with current Monitoring stack but using a separated formulas.

* Containerized Deployment: The Health-Check-Tool components, including Loki, Promtail, Grafana, and the Exporter, are deployed as containers within a POD, simplifying scaling and management.

> * Comunication with Uyuni server: The approach to establishing communication with the Uyuni server lies in the underlying infrastructure setup. When deployed in a standalone environment, the system leverages Podman's networking capabilities to facilitate connectivity. This involves configuring Podman containers to ensure they can communicate effectively with the Uyuni server, using Podman's built-in networking features such as container-specific network configurations. Alternatively, in environments where Kubernetes is employed, communication with the Uyuni server is managed through Kubernetes networking principles.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Communication with Uyuni server: The approach to establishing communication with the Uyuni server lies in the underlying infrastructure setup. When deployed in a standalone environment, the system leverages Podman's networking capabilities to facilitate connectivity. This involves configuring Podman containers to ensure they can communicate effectively with the Uyuni server, using Podman's built-in networking features such as container-specific network configurations. Alternatively, in environments where Kubernetes is employed, communication with the Uyuni server is managed through Kubernetes networking principles.
```

Saline should be configurable to use IPC or TCP sockets. Switching Salt Master to use TCP sockets would enable Saline to run on a different container than the Salt Master.

The Saline engine running on the Uyuni server, will provide data and metrics to feed Prometheus and Grafana instances and also a future UI with a live view of running actions. Eventually, this component should be integrated as part of the default Uyuni server stack.

### Health Check Tool: An standalone tool you can run on an running Uyuni server or use in a disconnected setup (via supportconfig)
In this case, this tool is mean not only to provide a picture of the current health status of a live running the Uyuni server, where the tool has access to it and can fetch data in real time, but it is meant to also help engineers and supporters to analyze and debug problems on disconnected setups, where the tool doesn't have access to an actual running Uyuni server, but only has a "supportconfig" as a source of data.

> In this regard, on disconnected setups, the tool cannot rely on existing Uyuni server components, neither existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, but it should be able to deploy its own instances to visualize the data coming from a "supportconfig".

Reviewer 2: The main motivation for an "standalone" version of the Health Check Tool was to not depend at all of an existing Uyuni/Monitoring deployment, so you just need a "supportconfig" and that's it.

> In this regard, on disconnected setups, the tool cannot rely on existing Uyuni server components, neither existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, but it should be able to deploy its own instances to visualize the data coming from a "supportconfig".

Reviewer 5: Users could effectively replace the existing Prometheus/Grafana server with the self-contained and pre-configured Health Check Tool. That will make the current monitoring stack redundant.

> In this regard, on disconnected setups, the tool cannot rely on existing Uyuni server components, neither existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, but it should be able to deploy its own instances to visualize the data coming from a "supportconfig".

Reviewer 4: This disconnected setup is only for us i-e supporters and engineers.

> In this regard, on disconnected setups, the tool cannot rely on existing Uyuni server components, neither existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, but it should be able to deploy its own instances to visualize the data coming from a "supportconfig".

Reviewer 5: The deployment modes _standalone_ and _disconnected_ are not clearly defined in the document. Also the components which they include are not listed.

> In this regard, on disconnected setups, the tool cannot rely on existing Uyuni server components, neither existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, but it should be able to deploy its own instances to visualize the data coming from a "supportconfig".

Reviewer 2: I hope this is now more clear after the latest changes on the RFC text.

> When the tool have access to an Uyuni server, then it can run "standalone" or via `mgradm`, allowing to resuse existing Prometheus and Grafana instances.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When the tool have access to an Uyuni server, then it can run "standalone" or via `mgradm`, allowing to reuse existing Prometheus and Grafana instances.
```

- The Health Check Tool is not installed or running by default in a Uyuni server.
- As multiple components (containers) are deployed, resources on a live Uyuni server might be affected.
- It should be able to reuse existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, allowing integration with existing Monitoring stack.

# How is the exporter going to access to uyuni-server container? For example, to query the database.
As mentioned, the exporter needs to have access to Uyuni server container. It does need to query the DB and also execute some Salt runners jobs to gather metrics. If the "exporter" runs in a separated container than the Salt Master, then we can make the "exporter" container to run in the same network than the "uyuni-server", then TCP sockets are available to use.

There are some Salt runners jobs that requires access to Salt Master Event publisher, currently exposed via IPC socket. This makes it tricky access these sockets from a different container. Some metrics might not be available until we move to "TCP" sockets for the Salt Master Event publisher in this case.

> Alternatively, we could make the "exporter" as part of the server-image, even if not running by default. Then it is up to the Healh Check Tool or Monitoring formula to start it. This would solve the current issue of not having access to the IPC sockets.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we could make the "exporter" as part of the server-image, even if not running by default. Then it is up to the Health Check Tool or Monitoring formula to start it. This would solve the current issue of not having access to the IPC sockets.
```

# Security considerations

> In the current design, we are exposing metrics via Promotheus and making them available in Grafana, and more importantly we are exposing logs messages via Loki/LogCLI to CLI and Grafana users. It is important to notice that after running this tool, and until related containers are destroyed, the Grafana Dashboards (and other components like Prometheus and Loki/LogCLI) are exposing metrics and logs messages that may contain sensitive data and information to any non-root user in the system or to anyone that have access to this host in the network.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In the current design, we are exposing metrics via Prometheus and making them available in Grafana, and more importantly we are exposing logs messages via Loki/LogCLI to CLI and Grafana users. It is important to notice that after running this tool, and until related containers are destroyed, the Grafana Dashboards (and other components like Prometheus and Loki/LogCLI) are exposing metrics and logs messages that may contain sensitive data and information to any non-root user in the system or to anyone that have access to this host in the network.
```

* Alert Noise: Fine-tuning alert rules to balance sensitivity and specificity is critical. Without careful configuration, there's a risk of alert fatigue due to a high volume of non-critical alerts, potentially causing important alerts to be overlooked.

# Alternatives

[alternatives]: #alternatives

- What other designs/options have been considered?

  1. Running the Uyuni Health-Check-Tool along with the Uyuni Server container in the same pod. This could lead to a resource problem on the node running the pod.
  2. Integration with current Monitoring stack. This has been considered in this RFC as an complementary integration for the standalone Health Check Tool.

- What is the impact of not doing this?

  1. Not having a Health Check Tools to monitor health of an Uyuni server. Poor monitoring when it comes to internal metrics, overall Uyuni server health, and particularly around Salt jobs and actions.

# Unresolved questions

[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

- What are the unknowns?

Has Saline to be part of the current Uyuni Monitoring stack? As mentioned above, it does make sense to integrate Saline in the current Monitoring stack, probably as an "opt-in".

> 

Reviewer 4: From my perspective, Saline is primarily well-suited for larger customers. Although it could also offer advantages for smaller customers, I would suggest keeping it separate, perhaps as a distinct formula, to maintain clarity and tailored functionality for Saline.

- What can happen if Murphy's law holds true?

The tool will just not be able to provide insights.
Security issues.

> The tool might also enhaust resources on the server (computing/memory/disk).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The tool might also exhaust resources on the server (computing/memory/disk).
```

- Feature Name: A Health Check tool for Uyuni
- Start Date: 2024-11-03

# Summary

[summary]: #summary

The Uyuni Health Check Tool is conceived as a solution aimed at optimizing the management of Uyuni environments by providing timely insights. Its goal is to enhance the proactive maintenance capabilities of administrators, ensuring high performance and stability across the Uyuni infrastructure. Simultaneously, the tool facilitates a more efficient troubleshooting process for engineers and support teams, enabling them to address and resolve any issues. By integrating into the Uyuni ecosystem, this tool seeks to improve the overall health and reliability of the system.

# Motivation

[motivation]: #motivation

> Developing a Health Check Tool for Uyuni is becoming more critical with each passing day. We have an increasing number of bug reports and a bug report usually takes a lot more time due to the extensive communication overhead involved. We need a tool that helps identify issues quickly and present the state of suse manager health to all the stakeholders on each level from users to support and engineering.

Author: I changed it to Uyuni as you mentioned.

## Use cases

**User Story 1**

As a system administrator using the Uyuni, I want a comprehensive health check tool that can efficiently assess the overall health and performance of the Uyuni infrastructure and its components. This tool should provide valuable insights into the system's status, detect potential issues, and offer recommendations for improvements, enabling me to proactively maintain and optimize the Uyuni environment.

**User story 2**

User Story: As an engineer responsible for maintaining the Uyuni codebase, I want to efficiently investigate and fix reported bugs or performance issues within the Uyuni infrastructure. To expedite the debugging process and ensure a stable codebase, I would like to leverage the capabilities of the integrated health check tool, which will help me identify any underlying health-related problems that could be contributing to the reported bug.

> As an engineer, I get the supportconfig mostly so I need this tool to consume the provided supportconfig and help me identify any potential issues before I dive into the huge amount of logs.

Author: This has been clarified. Thank you @nodeg for all your sugestions.

* Streamlined Debugging Process for engineers: Assist engineers and developers in quickly identifying and addressing bugs or performance issues within the Uyuni codebase.

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

## Component Overview

### Health-Check-Tool

* Loki/Promtail: These two components are for log aggregation, indexing and querying. Loki acts as the centralized logging system, storing and managing logs, while Promtail is deployed on the Uyuni server to collect logs and forward them to Loki.

* Grafana: Utilized for visualization, with dashboards displaying metrics, logs, and alerts, facilitating an integrated view of system health and performance.

* Uyuni-health-exporter: A custom exporter to gather specific metrics related to Uyuni server health, including database, service status, and resource usage.

* Alerting System: Leveraging Grafana's alerting mechanism, configured to monitor critical metrics and log patterns, triggering alerts based on predefined thresholds.

> * LogCLI: A command-line interface tool provided by Grafana Loki, LogCLI enables direct querying of logs stored in Loki from the terminal. It supports running LogQL queries, live tailing of logs, and viewing logs in a flexible output format. This tool is particularly useful for administrators and developers who prefer to work within a CLI environment for quick log searches, debugging, and log analysis without the need for a graphical interface.

Author: You're right. In the component overview we mention the `Loki/Promtail` component so even if the product in the Grafana website is called `Grafana Loki` we might use just Loki in this context.

Proof-of-Concept: https://github.com/uyuni-project/poc-uyuni-health-check

### Saline

> Saline is an addition for Salt used in SUSE Manager/Uyuni aimed to provide better control and visibility for states deployment in the large scale environments. It can provide metrics related to Salt events and "state.apply" process on the minions.

Author: Applied! Also just mentioning Uyuni in this context.

## Metrics

* Server status and resource utilization

* Database health and integrity

* Status of relevant Uyuni services

## How is the exporter going to access to uyuni-server container? For example, to query the database.
As mentioned, the exporter needs to have access to Uyuni server container. It does need to query the DB and also execute some Salt runners jobs to gather metrics. If the "exporter" runs in a separated container than the Salt Master, then we can make the "exporter" container to run in the same network than the "uyuni-server", then TCP sockets are available to use.

There are some Salt runners jobs that requires access to Salt Master Event publisher, currently exposed via IPC socket. This makes it tricky access these sockets from a different container. Some metrics might not be available until we move to "TCP" sockets for the Salt Master Event publisher in this case.

Alternatively, we could make the "exporter" as part of the server-image, even if not running by default. Then it is up to the Health Check Tool or Monitoring formula to start it. This would solve the current issue of not having access to the IPC sockets.

> ## Saline vs Health Check Tool

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
## Saline vs. Health Check Tool
```

We want to differentiate conceptually between "Saline" and the "Health Check Tool". In this regard, these are two different components with different purposes.

> ### Saline: Salt state application monitoring to be integrated to the product.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Saline: Salt state application monitoring to be integrated into the product

```

> Saline exposes Salt state metrics to Prometheus. It is a tool meant to attach to Salt Master sockets and analyze and extract Salt state/jobs metrics from a live and running Uyuni server.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Saline exposes Salt state metrics to Prometheus. It is a tool meant to attach to Salt Master sockets and analyze and extract Salt state/job metrics from a live and running Uyuni server.
```

> Saline setup is done is two steps, and should be also driven by `mgradm`:
> 
> 1. Install `saline` RPM in the Uyuni server (pre-installed in the server image). This provides "setup" script and new "Formulas with Forms".
> 2. Run `saline-setup run` to configure and enable the `salined` service to attach to the Salt Master.
> 3. In the "Formulas with Forms" UI, new formulas will appear: "Saline Prometheus" and "Saline Grafana". These can be used to automatically configure your existing Prometheus and Grafana instances to get the metrics and dashboards from Saline.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Setting up Saline is done is two steps, and should be also driven by `mgradm`:

1. Install the `saline` RPM package on the Uyuni server (already pre-installed in the server image). This provides a "setup" script and new "Formulas with Forms".
2. Run `saline-setup run` to configure and enable the `salined` service that attaches to the Salt Master.
3. In the web UI under "Formulas with Forms", two new formulas will appear: "Saline Prometheus" and "Saline Grafana". These can be used to automatically configure your existing Prometheus and Grafana instances to get the metrics and dashboards from Saline.
```

Saline already provides an easy way to integrate with the current Monitoring Stack (Formulas with Forms).

> The `salined` service must be able to attach to the Salt Master. At the moment this is done by connecting to Salt Master IPC sockets, which means `salined` needs to live in the same system/container than the Salt Master.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The `salined` service must be able to attach to the Salt Master. At the moment this is done by connecting to Salt Master IPC sockets, which means `salined` needs to live in the same system/container as the Salt Master.
```

> Saline should be configurable to use IPC or TCP sockets. Switching Salt Master to use TCP sockets would enable Saline to run on a different container than the Salt Master.
> 
> The Saline engine running on the Uyuni server, will provide data and metrics to feed Prometheus and Grafana instances and also a future UI with a live view of running actions. Eventually, this component should be integrated as part of the default Uyuni server stack.
> 
> For now Saline would be part of Uyuni server image.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Saline should be configurable to use IPC or TCP sockets. Switching the Salt Master to use TCP sockets would enable Saline to run on a different container as the Salt Master.

The Saline engine running on the Uyuni server will provide data and metrics to feed Prometheus and Grafana instances and also a future UI with a live view of running actions. Eventually, this component should be integrated as part of the default Uyuni server stack.

For now, Saline would be part of the Uyuni server image.
```

> ### Health Check Tool: An standalone tool you can run on an running Uyuni server or use in a disconnected setup (via supportconfig)

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
### Health Check Tool: An standalone tool you can run on an Uyuni server or use in a disconnected setup (via supportconfig)

```

> In this case, this tool is mean not only to provide a picture of the current health status of a live running the Uyuni server, where the tool has access to it and can fetch data in real time, but it is meant to also help engineers and supporters to analyze and debug problems on disconnected setups, where the tool doesn't have access to an actual running Uyuni server, but only has a "supportconfig" as a source of data.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This tool is meant not only to provide a picture of the current health status of a live running Uyuni server, where the tool has access to it and can fetch data in real time, but also to help engineers and supporters to analyze and debug problems on disconnected setups, where the tool doesn't have access to an actual running Uyuni server, but only has a "supportconfig" as a source of data.
```

> In this regard, on disconnected setups, the tool cannot rely on existing Uyuni server components, neither existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, but it should be able to deploy its own instances to visualize the data coming from a "supportconfig".

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
On disconnected setups, the tool cannot rely on existing Uyuni server components, neither existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, but it should be able to deploy its own instances to visualize the data coming from a "supportconfig".
```

> When the tool have access to an Uyuni server, then it can run "standalone" or via `mgradm`, allowing to reuse existing Prometheus and Grafana instances.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
When the tool has access to an Uyuni server, it can run either "standalone" or via `mgradm`, allowing to reuse existing Prometheus and Grafana instances.
```

> - The Health Check Tool is not installed or running by default in a Uyuni server.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The Health Check Tool is not installed or running by default on an Uyuni server.
```

- As multiple components (containers) are deployed, resources on a live Uyuni server might be affected.

> - It should be able to reuse existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, allowing integration with existing Monitoring stack.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- It should be able to reuse existing Prometheus and Grafana instances, allowing integration with an existing Monitoring stack.
```

# Security considerations

> In the current design, we are exposing metrics via Prometheus and making them available in Grafana, and more importantly we are exposing logs messages via Loki/LogCLI to CLI and Grafana users. It is important to notice that after running this tool, and until related containers are destroyed, the Grafana Dashboards (and other components like Prometheus and Loki/LogCLI) are exposing metrics and logs messages that may contain sensitive data and information to any non-root user in the system or to anyone that have access to this host in the network.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
In the current design, we are exposing metrics via Prometheus and making them available in Grafana, and more importantly we are exposing log messages via Loki/LogCLI to CLI and Grafana users. It is important to notice that after running this tool, and until related containers are destroyed, the Grafana Dashboards (and other components like Prometheus and Loki/LogCLI) are exposing metrics and log messages that may contain sensitive data and information to any non-root user on the system or to anyone that have access to this host in the network.
```

> Promtail pipeline definition can be enhanced to use [replace](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/send-data/promtail/stages/replace/) function, to hide sensitive data from logs. Users must have a configuration file to define the different filters to apply to the Promtail pipeline. Filters must be also configurable via Monitoring Formula.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The Promtail pipeline definition can be enhanced to use the [replace](https://grafana.com/docs/loki/latest/send-data/promtail/stages/replace/) stage in order to hide sensitive data from log files. Users must have a configuration file to define the different filters to apply to the Promtail pipeline. Filters must be also configurable via the Monitoring Formula.
```

TLS must be enabled for Promtail, Prometheus and Loki to ensure a secure transport.

> Authentication backend for Prometheus and Loki is usually delegated to an authentication reverse proxy. This must be included in the documentation and probably be considered in the Formula.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
An authentication backend for Prometheus and Loki is usually delegated to an authentication reverse proxy. This must be included in the documentation and probably be considered in the Formula.
```

> # Learning Curve and Documentation

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
# Learning Curve and Documentation

```

System administrators and developers may need to familiarize themselves with Loki/Promtail's log querying language (LogQL) and Grafana's alerting mechanisms. The learning curve associated with these tools could slow down initial adoption and efficiency gains.

In this sense, we must provide a good documentation with tutorials, use cases and examples to help the users to early and smoothly adopt the new monitoring capabilities.

# Implementation steps

### Phase 0 (before 5.0 GA):

> #### Uyuni Health Check

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Uyuni Health Check

```

- Create RPM packages in OBS/IBS.

> - Use container images building on OBS/IBS for the different components.
> - Provide an "standalone" version only (no integration with Monitoring stack). Via Uyuni server channel (or others so it is available for engineering or supporters).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Use container images building in OBS/IBS for the different components.
- Provide a "standalone" version only (no integration with the Monitoring stack) via an Uyuni server channel (or others so it is available for engineers or supporters).
```

- Flag this as a Tech Preview.

> #### Saline
> - Research about using TCP instead of IPC sockets for Salt Master internal sockets.
> - Build Saline in OBS/IBS and make it part of the Uyuni Server image
> - Saline runs inside "uyuni-server" container.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Saline

- Research about using TCP instead of IPC sockets for Salt Master internal sockets.
- Build Saline in OBS/IBS and make it part of the Uyuni Server image
- Saline runs inside the `uyuni-server` container.
```

### Phase 1 (after 5.0 GA):

> #### Uyuni Health Check
> - Enhance metrics, dashboards and alerts.
> - Allow user to enhance Loki pipeline to add filters and/or replace patterns to replace sensitive information.
> - Integration with Monitoring Stack. Enhance monitoring formula to enable Health Check monitoring.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Uyuni Health Check

- Enhance metrics, dashboards and alerts.
- Allow users to enhance the Loki pipeline to add filters and/or replace patterns to be able to replace sensitive information.
- Integration with the Monitoring Stack. Enhance the monitoring formula to enable Health Check monitoring.
```

- Reuse configuration from "standalone" version.

> #### Saline
> - Provide "Saline" inside a separated container that attach to Salt Master TCP sockets from "uyuni-server" container.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
#### Saline

- Provide "Saline" inside a separated container that attaches to Salt Master TCP sockets from the `uyuni-server` container.
```

- Alternatively, explore sharing Salt Master IPC sockets between containers.

# Drawbacks

[drawbacks]: #drawbacks

* Resource Usage: Running additional services for log aggregation, analysis, and enhanced alerting could increase the resource demands on the server, including CPU, memory, and storage. This might necessitate upgrades to existing hardware or reevaluation of resource allocation in cloud environments to ensure optimal performance.

* Security Considerations: With the introduction of new components for logging and alerting, there might be additional security considerations to address, including access controls, data encryption, and secure communication channels between services.

* Alert Noise: Fine-tuning alert rules to balance sensitivity and specificity is critical. Without careful configuration, there's a risk of alert fatigue due to a high volume of non-critical alerts, potentially causing important alerts to be overlooked.

# Alternatives

[alternatives]: #alternatives

### What other designs/options have been considered?

> 1. Running the Uyuni Health-Check-Tool along with the Uyuni Server container in the same pod. This could lead to a resource problem on the node running the pod.
> 2. Integration with current Monitoring stack. This has been considered in this RFC as an complementary integration for the standalone Health Check Tool.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. Running the Uyuni Health-Check-Tool along with the `uyuni-server` container on the same pod. This could lead to a resource problem on the node running the pod.
2. Integration with the current Monitoring stack. This has been considered in this RFC as an complementary integration for the standalone Health Check Tool.
```

### What is the impact of not doing this?

> 1. Not having a Health Check Tools to monitor health of an Uyuni server. Poor monitoring when it comes to internal metrics, overall Uyuni server health, and particularly around Salt jobs and actions.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
1. Not having a Health Check Tool to monitor the health of an Uyuni server. Poor monitoring when it comes to internal metrics, overall Uyuni server health, and particularly around Salt jobs and actions.
```

# Unresolved questions

[unresolved]: #unresolved-questions

### What are the unknowns?

Has Saline to be part of the current Uyuni Monitoring stack? As mentioned above, it does make sense to integrate Saline in the current Monitoring stack, probably as an "opt-in".

### What can happen if Murphy's law holds true?

> The tool will just not be able to provide insights.
> Security issues.
> The tool might also exhaust resources on the server (computing/memory/disk).

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- The tool will just not be able to provide insights.
- Security issues.
- The tool might also exhaust resources on the server (computing/memory/disk).
```

Steps:

  - Deployment: Install Promtail on the Uyuni infrastructure as a container that is part of the Uyuni-Health-Check Pod.
  - Configuration:
    - Edit the Promtail configuration to define the paths of log files to monitor. In the containerized Uyuni environment, the Promtail container must be configured to have read access to mapped volumes that correspond to the log locations of the Uyuni server container.
    - Configure Promtail to forward logs to the Loki instance.

### Component 5: LogCLI
Goal: Incorporate LogCLI to provide a command-line interface for querying logs stored in Loki, enhancing the toolset available for diagnostics, troubleshooting and operational reporting.

### Component 6: Supportconfig metrics gatherer

Stakeholders: Engineers and Supporters

Goal: Extract relevant metrics from supportconfig files.

Configuration: No extra configuration needed apart from the path to the supportconfig files.

### Component 7: Saline

Configuration: Deploy as a monitoring formula.

## Alerting and notifications

* Severity Levels: Alerts are categorized by severity levels (e.g., Critical, Warning, Info), allowing for a prioritized response and management.

> * Notification Channels: Configured within Grafana to support various notification mechanisms.

Reviewer 5: As already commented above. We currently use _Alertmanager_ for configuring notifications.

Reviewer 5: Yes, thank you. I have found one more appearance above and suggested a change there.

## Expected outcome

* Proactive Monitoring and Maintenance: Enable system administrators to proactively monitor the health and performance of the Uyuni infrastructure. By providing comprehensive insights into the system's status, the tool aims to help administrators detect and resolve potential issues before they escalate into significant problems.

* Streamlined Debugging Process for engineers: Assist engineers and developers in quickly identifying and addressing bugs or performance issues within the Uyuni codebase.

# Detailed design

[design]: #detailed-design

## Component Overview

### Health-Check-Tool

* Loki/Promtail: These two components are for log aggregation, indexing and querying. Loki acts as the centralized logging system, storing and managing logs, while Promtail is deployed on the Uyuni server to collect logs and forward them to Loki.

* Grafana: Utilized for visualization, with dashboards displaying metrics, logs, and alerts, facilitating an integrated view of system health and performance.

* Uyuni-Health-Exporter: A custom exporter to gather specific metrics related to Uyuni server health, including database, service status, and resource usage.

> * Alerting System: Leveraging Grafana's alerting mechanism, configured to monitor critical metrics and log patterns, triggering alerts based on predefined thresholds.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Alerting System: Leveraging Loki and Prometheus alerting mechanism, configured to monitor critical metrics and log patterns, triggering alerts based on predefined thresholds. Using Alertmanager for sending notifications.
```

### Phase 0: Disconnected Setup

#### Uyuni Health Check

- Create RPM packages in OBS/IBS.
- Use container images building in OBS/IBS for the different components.
- Use alerting rules to detect potential issues.
- Gathers opinions from engineers about possible improvements of metrics, dashboards and alerts.

#### Saline

- Research about using TCP instead of IPC sockets for Salt Master internal sockets.

### Phase 1: Integrated Solution

#### Uyuni Health Check

- Integration with the Monitoring Stack. Enhance the monitoring formula to enable Health Check monitoring.
- Enhance metrics, dashboards and alerts.
- Allow users to enhance the Promtail pipeline to add filters and/or replace patterns to be able to replace sensitive information.
- Use the alert system to detect potential issues and provide recommendations.

#### Saline

- Build Saline in OBS/IBS and make it part of the Uyuni Server image
- Saline runs inside the `uyuni-server` container.

### Phase 2: Standalone Solution

#### Uyuni Health Check

- Provide a "standalone" version only (no integration with the Monitoring stack) via an Uyuni server channel (or others so it is available for engineers or supporters).

> - Reuse configuration from the "integrated" version.

Reviewer 5: In the discussion we have brought up an idea of having a _one button_ default configuration deployment of standard monitoring/logging stack. I think we could integrate it in the SUMA Admin UI.

Do you think we could add a comment about this alternative implementation?
